>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 13...
ON THE ROAD WITH MIGRANT
FAMILIES TRYING TO GET THROUGH
EUROPE.
>> THE RULES HERE ARE CHANGING
CONSTANTLY.
ONE DAY REFUGEES CAN CROSS THE
PATH BETWEEN THE FIELDS, THE
NEXT DAY THEY CAN'T.
>> I JUST COME THIS PLACE...
I WANT TO GO THIS 100 METERS.
THEY DON'T LET ME.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY LIVING IN A
SMALLER CITY IS COSTING YOU MORE
TO FLY.
AND THE RISE OF SNEAKER CULTURE.
>> THIS 2009 COLLABORATION
SNEAKER BETWEEN LOUIS VUITTON
AND KANYE WEST RETAILED FOR
$960.
THIS EBAY SELLER IS ASKING FOR
$3,400 FOR HER PAIR.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ON THE EVE OF A EUROPEAN UNION
SUMMIT TO DEAL WITH THE UNABATED
FLOW OF MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES
INTO EUROPE, GERMANY IS NOW
LIMITING ITS WELCOME OF
ARRIVALS.
TODAY, GERMANY BLOCKED MIGRANT-
PACKED TRAINS COMING FROM
AUSTRIA AND ANNOUNCED NEW BORDER
CHECKS.
THE MOVE CAME AFTER GERMANY HAD
ACCEPTED 16,000 REFUGEES THIS
WEEKEND.
8,500 MIGRANTS CROSSED FROM
EUROPE'S BUSIEST ARRIVAL POINT,
GREECE, INTO NEIGHBORING
MACEDONIA, A ONE-DAY RECORD
ACCORDING TO THE UNITED NATIONS.
BUT 28 MIGRANTS DIED TRYING TO
REACH GREECE TODAY, DROWNING
WHEN THEIR WOODEN BOAT CARRYING
130 PEOPLE CAPSIZED IN THE
AEGEAN SEA.
MORE THAN 2,700 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
THIS YEAR DURING SEA CROSSINGS,
THOUGH MORE THAN 430,000-- MANY
REFUGEES SEEKING ASYLUM-- HAVE
MADE IT.
OVER THE PAST WEEK, OUR PBS
NEWSHOUR TEAM OF WILLIAM
BRANGHAM, JON GERBERG, AND
SASKIA DE MELKER HAS BEEN IN
EUROPE COVERING THE MASSIVE
MIGRATION OF REFUGEES FROM THE
MIDDLE EAST, AFRICA, AND
AFGHANISTAN.
THE NEW ARRIVALS STRUGGLE TO
MAKE THEIR WAY FROM SOUTHERN AND
EASTERN EUROPE-- GREECE,
MACEDONIA, SERBIA, AND HUNGARY--
TO WEALTHIER, MORE WELCOMING
COUNTRIES IN THE NORTH AND WEST,
LIKE AUSTRIA, GERMANY, AND
SWEDEN.
TONIGHT, OUR TEAM FILES THIS
REPORT ABOUT THEIR JOURNEY AND
THE PEOPLE THEY MET.
IT IS PRESENTED BY WILLIAM
BRANGHAM.
>> SITS RIGHT ON THE BORDER WITH
SERBIA.
HERE, ONE WEEK AGO, WE WADE INTO
THE RIVER OF REFUGEES FLOWING
FROM THE MIDDLE EAST TO WESTERN
EUROPE.
WE MEET OUR SHARE OF IRAQIS,
AFGHANS, NORTH AFRICANS BUT MOST
OF THE PEOPLE HERE ARE SYRIAN,
FLEEING THEIR NATION'S FOUR-AND-
A-HALF-YEAR-OLD CIVIL WAR.
PEOPLE LIKE THE HALABI FAMILY,
SAID, HIS WIFE, TWO YOUNG SONS
AND 14-YEAR-OLD MARIA.
>> WE ARE SO-- EVERYONE IS
TRAVELING THIS WAY.
SO WE DECIDED TO TRAVEL JUST
LIKE THEM.
WE'VE BEEN TRAVELING LIKE TWO
WEEKS AGO.
TURKEY, GREECE, MACEDONIA,
SERBIA AND THEN WE'RE HERE.
>> HUNGARY MORE SO THAN
ALMOST ANY OTHER EUROPEAN
NATION IS DOING EVERYTHING
IT CAN TO SLOW THE ARRIVAL
OF THESE REFUGEES.
BUT THE GOVERNMENT JUST
CAN'T BUILD FENCES FAST
ENOUGH.
THE POLICE SEEM OVERWHELMED
BY THE TASK AT HAND.
THE CAMPS THEY BUILD QUICKLY
FILL TO CAPACITY, SO THIS
MUDDY FIELD IS WHERE
EVERYONE ELSE GETS PUT.
THE RESULTS HERE ARE
CHANGING CONSTANTLY.
ONE DAY REFUGEES CAN CROSS
THE PATH BETWEEN THE FIELDS
AND ANOTHER DAY THEY CAN'T.
>> I JUST COME, I WANT TO GO
THIS 100 METER.
THEY DON'T LET ME.
>> WE HOPE TO FOLLOW THE
ROUTING MY GRANTS TAKE FROM
HERE TO POINTS NORTH TO THE
NATIONS WHO WELCOME THEIR
ARRIVAL BUT IT IS CONFUSING.
THE HALABI FAMILY TRIES HARD
TO FOLLOW THE RULES WAITING
PATIENTLY, DOING WHAT POLICE
ASK, CLEANING UP THE TRASH
WHEN THEY CAN.
BUT SAID IS FRUSTRATED.
>> WE DO RESPECT THE LAW.
AND WE HOPE THAT THEY
UNDERSTAND THIS.
IF THERE IS A PROCEDURE,
EVERYONE WILL FOLLOW THE
PROCEDURE.
BUT OPPORTUNITY, NOTHING IS
CLEAR FOR US.
>> THEY PACK UP AND WAIT IN
LINE FOR HOURS FOR BUSES TO
TAKE THEM FARTHER NORTH BUT
NOT NECESSARILY WHERE THEY
WANT TO GO.
THEY'LL LIKELY END UP STUCK
IN HUNGARIAN PROCESSING
CENTERS WHOSE CONDITIONS
HAVE BEEN DESCRIBED BY HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH AS QUOTE
ABYSMAL.
BUT THE BUSES DON'T COME SO
IT WILL BE ANOTHER NIGHT
SLEEPING ON THE GROUND.
EITHER WAY, THEIR GOAL OF
GETTING TO SWEDEN WHICH THEY
HAVE HEARD HAVE GREAT
SCHOOLS FOR THEIR KIDS IS
PUT OFF FOR ANOTHER DAY AT
LEAST.
OTHERS GROW IMPATIENT AT THE
CONDITIONS AND BEING HELD BY
POLICE AND THEY CHOOSE TO
BREAK THROUGH POLICE LINES
TO SET OFF ON FOOT, HOPING
FOR STRENGTH AND SAFETY IN
NUMBERS.
AFTER THEIR BREAKOUT, THE
KAD O, R FAMILY HIDES IN A
FIELD WAITING FOR NIGHT FALL
TO MAKE A MORE DISCREET
ESCAPE.
IN TWO MORE DAYS THEY WILL
MAKE IT INTO AUSTRIA SENDING
US PHOTOS OF THEM IN A
REFUGEE CENTER RUN BY THE
RED CROSS.
NEXT WE LEAVE HUNGARY'S
SOUTHERN BORDER AND DRIVE
NORTH TOWARDS THE CAPITOL,
BUDAPEST, THE MAIN TRANSIT
POINT FOR REFUGEES.
IT IS A 110 MILE TREK BUT
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY WE FIND
THOSE IN THE AS LUCKY AS THE
KADOR FAMILY THIS IS AN
AFGHAN FAMILY WE WERE
TALKING TO ON THE SIDE OF
THE ROAD HEADED IN THIS
DIRECTION.
BUT THE POLICE CAME BY,
STOPPED THEM AND TOLD THEM
NOW THEY CAN'T GO TO THE
TRAIN STATION AS THEY
WANTED.
THEY HAVE TO BE TAKEN TO A
CAMP, FROM WHAT WE HAVE BEEN
TOLD, SOME OF THESE CAMPS
MEAN THAT YOU CAN BE STUCK
FOR WEEKS.
SO THEY THOUGHT THEY WERE
HEADED TO A TRAIN STATION,
EVENTUALLY ON THE WAY TO
GERMANY.
NOW IT'S NOT CLEAR WHAT IS
GOING TO HAPPEN WITH THEM.
>> FURTHER ALONG THE HIGHWAY
TO BUDAPEST WE SPOT TWO
YOUNG AFGHAN MEN SEEKING
SHELTER UNDERNEATH AN
OVERPASS.
TRAVELING OUT IN THE OPEN IN
HUNGARY WITHOUT A PROPER
VISA OR I.D. USUALLY ENDS
THIS WAY.
>> THESE MEN, DO YOU KNOW
WHERE THEY WILL BE TAKEN?
>> THE POLICE STATION.
>> AFTER THAT THE IMMIGRANT
CAMP.
>> TO AN IMMIGRANT CAMP
IN-- IN BUDAPEST?
IN AUSTRIA.
>> SORRY, BUT I-- CAN'T GIVE
YOU --
>> WE HAVE HEARD SMUGGLERS
MAKE A FORTUNE TRYING THESE
ROADS PICKING UP REFUGEES
AND GAS STATION AND
RESTAURANTS, CHARGING
EXORBITANT RATES AND
PROMISING SAFE PASSAGE.
ON THE HIGHWAY WE PASS BUSES
WITH REFUGEES SHUTTLING THEM
TO THEIR NEXT TEMPORARY
STOP.
I'M AT THE CENTRAL TRAIN
STATION IN BUDAPEST HUNGARY.
MOST OF THE REFUGEES HAVE
BEEN BUSED OR SENT ON TRAINS
FROM ELSEWHERE IN SOUTHERN
100 GARY AND THEY HAVE BEEN
WAITING TO TAKE THE NEXT
TRAIN TO VIENNA AND FURTHER
NORTH.
>> HOW LONG YOU HAVE BEEN
WAITING HERE?
>> I HAVE FROM THIS MORNING,.
>> EVERYONE PENNED IN CLOSE.
A VOLUNTEER SHOUTS
INSTRUCTIONS IN ARABIC TO
MOVE THIS WAY OR THAT, SIT
DOWN OR STAND UP.
BUT NO ONE SEEMS TO PAY HER
MUCH ATTENTION.
HUNGARIANS GET MOVED TO THE
FRONT OF THE LINE.
THEY GET THEIR OWN CARRIAGES
SEPARATE FROM THE MIGRANTS
ONCE THE TRAINS FINALLY
COME.
BECAUSE OF OVERCROWDING
AUSTRIA STOPPED RUNNING
TRAINS INTO HUNGARY, SO TO
MAKE IT TO THE BOARDER THERE
IS ANOTHER TRANSFER AN A TWO
MILE WALK TO THE CHECK
POINT.
A FEW DAYS EARLIER THIS
BOER CROSSING WAS BARRON.
ON THIS NIGHT IT'S A SEA OF
CONFUSION.
REFUGEES COME UP TO US TO
ASK, IS THIS AUSTRIA.
WHERE WILL THE NEXT BUS TAKE
US.
WE ARE AS CONFUSED AS THEY
ARE.
THEY SHOUT INSTRUCTIONS IN
LANGUAGES MOST OF THE
REFUGEES DON'T SPEAK.
HAMID IS FROM ALEPPO, A CITY
A FAULTED FROM ALL SIDES, BY
REBELS, BY ISIS, BY THE
ASSAD REGIME.
HE FLED WITH HIS WIFE, TWO
KIDS, BROTHER-IN-LAW AND
BEST FRIEND.
AFTER WHAT THEY LIVED
THROUGH THE CHAOS HERE IS
TAKING IN STRIDE.
>> WHAT WE CAN DO.
WE LEARN SO MANY THINGS ON
THIS JOURNEY.
HERE, MORE SAFETY THAN WHEN
WE BEFORE.
>> THEY LIKE MANY OF THE
REFUGEES WE MEET STILL
RETAIN THEIR HOSPITALITY AND
WARMTH OFFERING US FOOD AND
A SPOT ON THEIR BLANKET ON
THE CONCRETE FLOOR WHERE
THEY WILL END UP SLEEPING
TONIGHT.
>> THE MARKET, EVERYTHING --
>> WHAT DID YOU HOPE FOR
WHEN YOU GO TO GERMANY?
>> REALLY, I JUST WANT A SAFE
PLACE TO STAY.
>> THE NEXT AFTERNOON WE ARE
IN VIENNA IN THE EXHAUSTED
FAMILY FINALLY MAKES IT HERE
BY BUS.
HAMID BROTHER WHO IS ALREADY
LIVING IN MUNICH, GERMANY
HAS COME TO MEAT THEM.
THANKS TO A KIND POLICE
OFFICER, THEY'LL BE
PERMITTED TO DRIVE A WHICH
WITH HIM ACROSS THE AUSTRIAN
BORDER AND ON INTO GERMANY.
EVEN ON THIS UNCERTAIN ROAD,
THERE ARE TURNS OF GOOD LUCK.
>> RUSSIA IS
>> Sreenivasan: RUSSIA IS
CONTINUING TO BACK THE EMBATTLED
REGIME OF SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER SERGEI
LAVROV SAID TODAY RUSSIA IS
SENDING MORE WEAPONS TO THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT AND ADVISERS
TO TRAIN HIS ARMY SOLDIERS HOW
TO USE THEM.
RUSSIA HAS REMAINED AN ALLY OF
PRESIDENT ASSAD DURING THE
COUNTRY'S CIVIL WAR.
THE U.S. OPPOSES ASSAD AND HAS
WARNED RUSSIA THAT ARMING HIM
WILL ONLY ESCALATE THE WAR AND
INCREASE LOSS OF LIFE.
IN THE WEST AFRICAN NATION OF
CAMEROON, THE ISLAMIC MILITANT
GROUP BOKO HARAM IS SUSPECTED OF
CARRYING OUT TWO SUICIDE
BOMBINGS TODAY.
THE FIRST BOMBING KILLED TWO
PEOPLE IN A TOWN NEAR CAMEROON'S
BORDER WITH NIGERIA, THE SECOND
BOMBING NEAR A CHURCH KILLED
FOUR.
CAMEROON HAS BEEN REPEATEDLY
ATTACKED BY BOKO HARAM, WHICH IS
BASED IN NIGERIA, AND HAS
CONTRIBUTED TROOPS TO A FIVE-
NATION COALITION FIGHTING THE
TERROR GROUP.
A FAST-MOVING WILDFIRE IN
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA HAS FORCED
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS TO
EVACUATE THEIR HOMES.
THE FIRE HAS GROWN FROM 10,000
TO 40,000 ACRES SINCE IT BEGAN
YESTERDAY AND HAS CAUSED HEAVY
DAMAGE IN AND AROUND MIDDLETOWN,
CALIFORNIA.
THE FIRE, IN LAKE AND NAPA
COUNTIES, 100 MILES NORTH OF SAN
FRANCISCO, HAS DESTROYED BLOCKS
OF HOMES, BUSINESSES, AND A
SCHOOL.
MORE THAN A THOUSAND
FIREFIGHTERS ARE FIGHTING THAT
BLAZE, AND HUNDREDS OF
STRUCTURES REMAIN THREATENED AS
RESIDENTS FLEE TO SHELTERS.
>> AS WE CAME DOWN IT WAS JUST
FIRE EVERYWHERE AND ALL THE
HOUSES, NEIGHBOR HOUSES,
FRIEND'S HOUSE, EVERYBODY'S
HOUSES ARE BURNING UP.
IT'S AWFUL.
BUT WE'RE HERE AND WE ARE SAFE.
>> EVERYTHING BEHIND THE GAS
STATION IS GONE, SCHOOL IS GONE,
STORE'S GONE, AND A LOT OF
PEOPLE HAVE DOGS STUCK UP THERE,
AND THEY WON'T LET THEM GO GET
THEM, SO JUST KIND OF WAITING.
>> Sreenivasan: A LARGER
WILDFIRE THAT BROKE OUT
WEDNESDAY 70 MILES SOUTHEAST OF
SACRAMENTO HAS BURNED MORE THAN
80 HOMES TO THE GROUND.
THERE ARE 13 ACTIVE WILDFIRES IN
THE DROUGHT-RIDDEN STATE.
IF AND WHEN THE FEDERAL RESERVE
BANK RAISES INTEREST RATES, AS
IT IS WIDELY EXPECTED TO DO
POSSIBLY THIS WEEK, IT WOULD BE
THE FED'S FIRST RATE HIKE SINCE
BEFORE THE 2008 FINANCIAL
CRISIS.
THE COST OF YOUR HOME MORTGAGE
AND BORROWING MONEY FOR JUST
ABOUT ANYTHING WILL LIKELY GO
UP.
THERE WILL BE DEEP CONSEQUENCES
FOR CORPORATIONS TOO."
FINANCIAL TIMES" REPORTER ERIC
PLATT JOINS ME NOW FOR SOME
INSIGHT.
HOW DID COMPANIES TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THESE NEAR 0
PERCENT INTEREST RATES, CHEAP
MONEY OVER THE PAST SIX, SEVEN
EIGHT YEARS?
>> OVER THE PAST THREE YEAR
AS WE'VE SEEN MORE THAN A
TRILLION DOLLARS OF ISSUANCE
EACH YEAR AND IT ACCELERATED
EACH YEAR AS THEY TRY TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF CHEAP
BORROWING COSTS, TO FUND
BUYBACKS AN PURCHASE OTHER
COMPANIES IN A RECORD WAVE
OF MERGERS AN ACQUISITIONS.
>> SO THIS IS HOW THEY ARE
ABLE TO GIVE SOME OF THOSE
STOCK DIVIDENDS OR TO
INVESTORS.
>> EXACTLY.
INSTEAD OF USING CASH THAT
THEY HAVE, THEY CAN TAP DEBT
MARKETS NEARLY UNLIMITEDLY.
WE'VE SEEN APPLE DOING IT.
THEY HAVE CASH OVERSEAS BUT
THEY RADIO RATHER NOT TAKE A
TAX HIT ON.
INSTEAD THEY ISSUE BONDS
HERE TO PAY BACK DIVIDENDS
TO SHAREHOLDERS OR BUY BACK
SHARES.
>> SO APP SELL A BIG
SUCCESSFUL COMPANY.
I GET THAT.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE
RATES START TO CREEP UP
LITTLE BY LITTLE AND THE
COST OF BORROWING GETS MORE
EXPENSIVE.
>> SO THE COMPANIES YOU
WOULD BE LOOKING AT WOULD BE
ANYTHING IN SPECULATIVE
GRADE, PARTICULARLY THE
ENERGY CENTER WHICH HAS BEEN
HIT BY THE DROP IN COMMODITY
PRICES.
ALSO COMPANIES LIKE AMERICAN
APPAREL IS STRUGGLING UNDER
A DEBT LOAD, COMPANIES LIKE
SEARS AND J.C. PENNEY WHICH
STRUGGLED WITH THE RISE OF
AMAZON.
ANYONE THAT BORROWED HEAVILY
OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS TO
FINANCE THEIR OPERATIONS OR
HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO TURN
AROUND THEIR OPERATION WAS
BE A THREAT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THOSE
COMPANIES WE COULD SEE THEM
START TO DEFAULT ON SOME
THEIR LOANS BECAUSE IT'S NOT
SO CHEAP ANY MORE?
>> THAT WON'T BE THE MAIN
CONCERN.
IT WOULD BE IF ENERGY PRICES
CONTINUE TO STAY DOWN HERE.
HOWEVER, THE ISSUE IS IF
THEY WERE ABLE TO FINANCE
THEIR OPERATIONS OVER THE
PAST YEARS WITH DEBT
ISSUANCE AND NOW THEY COME
TO THE MARKET IN 2016 OR
2017 AND INVESTORS AREN'T
INTERESTED.
THEY MIGHT NOT BE INTERESTED
IN PAYING 6% OR 7% INTEREST
RATES IF THEY CAN GET ACCESS
AT ALL.
>> WHAT HAPPENS ON A
CONSUMER FRONT, WHAT IS THE
RIPPLE EFFECT IF THERE IS
THIS CONTRACTION IN
LIQUIDITY FOR COMPANIES?
>> SO THAT'S WHAT THE
FEDERAL RESERVE HAS BEEN
LOOKING AT.
THEY HAVE BEEN HOPING THAT
ROBUST JOBS GROWTH WOULD
TAKE AWAY ANY KIND OF
DEFAULT YOU WOULD SEE.
SO IF THESE COMPANIES DO
FAIL, I WOULD HOPE THESE JOB
WAS BE MADE UP ELSEWHERE,
THEY COULD GO TO THE
HEALTH-CARE SECTOR,
EDUCATION WHICH HAS BEEN
ADDING JOBS AT A FAST CLIP.
THAT SAID, THEIR CONCERN IS
CONSUMER CONFIDENCE DIPS A
LITTLE BIT.
IF YOU SEE BIG COMPANIES GO
UNDER, IN THE ENERGY SECTOR,
IF SUDDENLY CONSUMERS DON'T
WANT TO-- THEY SPEND A
LITTLE LESS SO THEY PULL OUT
MONEY FROM THE STOCK MARKET.
>> WHAT ARE THE ODDS THEN
GOING INTO THIS WEEK, THE
FED COULD RAISE THE RATES AS
SOON AS THIS WEEK, WHO SAYS
WHAT?
WHO IS BETTING ON NOW VERSUS
DECEMBER.
>> ECONOMISTS ON WALL STREET
BET NOW.
THEY SAY THE FED RANTS
TO-- THEY SAY THE FEDERAL
RESERVES WANTS TO GET AHEAD,
SO IF WE SEE ECONOMIC GROWTH
SLOW THEY COULD LOWER RATES
TO SPUR BORROWING COSTS BUT
TRADERS DON'T THINK THEY
WILL.
TRADERS SAY THEY ARE WORRIED
WITH THE RIPPLE EFFECTS OF
CHINA AND FINANCIAL MARKET
GYRATIONS OVER THE PAST FEW
WEEKS THAT THE FED DOESN'T
WANT TO ADD TO THAT
VOLATILITY SO THEY MAY WAIT
UNTIL DECEMBER.
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: AIRLINE MERGERS
IN RECENT YEARS ARE RESULTING IN
FEWER FLIGHTS IN THE U.S. AS
WELL AS A DISPARITY IN SERVICE
AND TICKET PRICES BETWEEN LARGE
CITIES AND SMALL ONES.
A NEW "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
ANALYSIS FINDS TICKET PRICES AT
THE NATION'S TEN BUSIEST
AIRPORTS-- INCLUDING ATLANTA,
DALLAS, AND DENVER-- HAVE BEEN
STABLE, INCREASING AROUND ONE
PERCENT ON AVERAGE FROM 2007 TO
2014 WHILE AIRLINES REDUCED THE
NUMBER OF PASSENGER SEATS
AVAILABLE BY 1.6%.
BUT AT THE 90 NEXT BIGGEST
AIRPORTS, INCLUDING DETROIT,
HONOLULU AND BIRMINGHAM,
AIRLINES HAVE RAISED FARES MORE
THAN SIX PERCENT ON AVERAGE AND
CUT AVAILABLE SEATING BY MORE
THAN 14 PERCENT.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE ABOUT THIS
WITH JACK NICAS OF THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
WHAT CAUSED THIS?
WHY IS THIS DISPARITY
HAPPENING?
>> WHAT WE'VE SEEN OVER THE
PAST SEVEN YEARS OR SO
THERE'S BEEN DRAMATIC
TRANSFOR PASSION IN THE U.S.
AIRLINE, THERE WAS A
BANKRUPTCY WITH AMERICAN
AIRLINES, FOUR BIG MERGERS
COMBINED EIGHT INTO FOUR.
AND VOLATILE FUEL PRICES
HAVE CAUSED A SHIFT IN
STRATEGY THAT REALLY HAVE
CAUSED AIRLINES TO LOOK MORE
AT PROFITS RATHER THAN
CHASING MARKET SHARE.
AS A RESULT, WHAT WE'VE SEEN
IS THEY ARE PULLING SERVICE
AT SOME OF THESE SMALL TORE
MIDSIZE CITIES AND
CONSOLIDATING THEIR
RESOURCES AT THE MEGAHUBS
WHERE THEY CAN MAKE THE MOST
MONEY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE
AIRLINES SAY LISTEN, I HAVE
ADDED FLIGHTS TO PLACES
WHERE THE ECONOMY IS DOING
BETTER WHERE PEOPLE CAN
AFFORD TO FLY AND LA CROSSE,
WISCONSIN PROBABLY DOESN'T
MEAN AS PAIN NEW PLANES OR
NEW AIRCRAFT AS SEATTLE,
WASHINGTON DOES.
>> RIGHT, EXACTLY.
IT'S A MATTER OF ECONOMICS.
FLYERS AREN'T SO USED TO
THIS THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY
FOR MANY YEARS WAS FOCUSED
ON MARKET SHARE.
IT MEANT A LOT OF
COMPETITION AND A LOT OF
FLIGHTS IN THE SMALLER TO
MIDSIZED CITIES BUT THE NEW
REALITY IS AIRLINES ARE
REALLY CUTTING BACK SOME OF
THESE SMALLER PLANES AND
SMALLER ROUTES.
AND AS A RESULT, FLIERS ARE
HAVING TO OFTENTIMES CONNECT
AT SOME OF THESE MEGAHUBS IF
THEY ARE LIVING IN ONE OF
THE MIDSIZE CITIES OR DRIVER
AN HOUR TO BIGGER AIRPORTS.
>> DOES THIS MEAN THAT THE
PRICES ARE GETTING LOWER OR
HIGHER.
>> PRICES ARE LARGELY STABLE
AT SOME OF THE MEGAHUBS SO
IF YOU ARE LIVING IN ONE OF
THESE CITIES, IT'S GOOD NEWS
BECAUSE YOU'VE GOT A LOT OF
OPTIONS AND PRICES ARE
MAINLY STABLE.
BUT AIR LANES ARE CUTTING
BACK AT SOME OF THE SMALLER
TO MIDSIZED CITIES AND AS A
RESULT PRICES ARE GOING UP.
WE HAVE TO SAY AS WELL,
AIRFARE DON'T TELL THE WHOLE
STORY.
OVER THIS PERIOD OF TIME
FROM 2007 TO 2014 THIS GREAT
TRANSFORMATION IN THE U.S.
AIRLINE INDUSTRY, THERE HAS
ALSO BEEN A BIG MOVE TO
INCREASE THE NUMBER OF FEES
ON PASSENGERS FOR THINGS
LIKE CHECKED BAGGAGE AND
CHANGE FEES.
AND AS A RESULT, THE AVERAGE
ROUND TRIP DOMESTIC PRICES
HAVE SOARED NOT JUST FROM
THE BASE FARE PERSPECTIVE.
>> I GOT STUCK ON A PLANE
RECENTLY WHERE THEY HAD A
FOR THE OVERHEAD BAG, A
FEE TO PICK YOUR SEAT, A FEE
TO CHECK A BAG IN, WHAT
ABOUT THE LOW-COST AIRLINES,
ARE THEY ALSO MOVING THEIR
PRICES UP?
>> THERE'S AN INTERESTING
NEW NICHE IN THE U.S.
AIRLINE INDUSTRY CALLED AN
ULTRA LOW-COST CARRIER, THE
BASE FAIR INCLUDES BASICALLY
JUST A SEAT ON THE PLANE TO
DO ANYTHING ELSE INCLUDING
TO GET YOUR BOARDING PASS
FROM A HUMAN TO GET A CUP OF
WATER ON THE PLANE TO CHOOSE
YOUR SEAT TO BRING A CARRY
ON BAG IN THE OVERHEAD BIN
ALL COSTS EXTRA.
THE MORE TRADITIONAL
DISCOUNT CARRIERS LIKE THE
SOUTHWEST AND JET BLUES ARE
BECOMING, THEY ARE CALLED
MORE HYBRID CARRIERS THAT
ARE LESS OF DISCOUNTERS ANY
MORE AND MORE OF LIKE THESE
MAJOR NETWORK CARRIERS, AND
FARES ARE GOING UP WITH
THESE CARRIERS AS WELL.
>> JACK OF "THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL," JOINING US FROM
SAN FRANCISCO, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: SNEAKERS ARE NOW
A MULTI-BILLION DOLLAR BUSINESS.
CONSIDER THAT MICHAEL JORDAN
MAKES MORE MONEY SPONSORING
SNEAKERS THAN HE EVER DID
PLAYING BASKETBALL.
BUT SNEAKERS ARE NOT JUST FOR
SPORTS ANYMORE.
A MUSEUM EXHIBIT OPEN HERE IN
NEW YORK UNTIL NEXT MONTH SHOWS
HOW SNEAKERS HAVE BECOME HIGH
FASHION ITEMS PRIZED BY
COLLECTORS.
NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS.
>> THESE ARE LIKE MY CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: TYE WALLEN SAYS HE
WEARS EVERY LAST ONE OF HIS 300
PAIRS OF "CHILDREN," THOUGH YOU
MIGHT JUST CALL THEM SNEAKERS.
SINCE THE 22-YEAR-OLD BROOKLYN
COLLEGE STUDENT BEGAN COLLECTING
VINTAGE AND NEW BASKETBALL SHOES
TEN YEARS AGO, HE ESTIMATES HE'S
SPENT CLOSE TO $50,000 ON THEM,
FROM $25 TO $1,500 A PAIR.
>> I'M INTO THEM BECAUSE OF THE
STYLE, HOW THEY LOOK, HOW THEY
FEEL.
I GET STOPPED ALL THE TIME ABOUT
THE DIFFERENT SNEAKERS I WEAR.
I WON'T GET RID OF ANY OF THEM
UNLESS I REALLY HAVE TO.
>> Reporter: WHEN HE BUYS
SNEAKERS SECONDHAND, WALLEN
KEEPS THE ORIGINAL BOX TO
PRESERVE THEIR HISTORY.
>> Reporter: OUT OF ALL OF THESE
SHOES, HOW MANY WOULD YOU SAY
YOU ACTUALLY WEAR?
>> TEN, 15 PAIRS?
>> Reporter: TEN, 15 PAIRS OUT
OF MORE THAN 100 PAIRS OF SHOES?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: UNLIKE WALLEN, 21-
YEAR-OLD CHRIS VASQUEZ, WHO'S
ALSO FROM BROOKLYN, KEEPS MOST
OF HIS MORE MODEST, 100-PAIR
SNEAKER COLLECTION STORED AWAY
IN HIS CLOSET.
>> I MEAN, IF YOU JUST LOOK AT
THE WAY THESE SNEAKERS LOOK AND
THE BOX THAT THEY CAME IN, THIS
IS MORE THAN A SHOE; IT'S ART.
SO, I THINK, IF YOU WORE THEM,
YOU KIND OF, LIKE... YOU KINDA
DESTROY THEM.
I MEAN, YOU WOULDN'T WEAR A
PAINTING, WOULD YOU?
>> Reporter: NO.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: IF BOTH VASQUEZ AND
WALLEN, WHO CONSIDER THEMSELVES"
SNEAKERHEADS," NEEDED ANY
VALIDATION THEIR COLLECTIONS ARE
ART, THEY NEED TO LOOK NO
FURTHER THAN THIS EXHIBIT AT THE
BROOKLYN MUSEUM.
THE STORY BEGINS IN THE MID-
1800S, WHEN THE TIRE COMPANY
GOODYEAR INVENTED THE VULCANIZED
RUBBER-SOLE.
THE FACT THAT WE ARE IN AN
EXHIBIT DEDICATED TO SNEAKER
CULTURE, WHAT DOES THAT SAY
ABOUT THE INDUSTRY AND WHERE
IT'S HEADED?
>> I MEAN, IT'S A DOUBLE-EDGED
SWORD.
>> Reporter: JIAN DELEON IS THE
DEPUTY STYLE EDITOR AT COMPLEX
MAGAZINE, WHICH COVERS URBAN
FASHION AND HIP HOP CULTURE.
>> THIS CULTURE THAT WAS ONCE
FOR A CERTAIN GROUP OF INSIDERS
WHO WERE SUPER PASSIONATE ABOUT
IT HAS BECOME MAINSTREAM.
>> Reporter: IN 1917, CONVERSE
INTRODUCED THE FIRST CANVAS-TOP
SNEAKERS MADE JUST FOR
BASKETBALL.
THE "ALL-STAR" WAS LATER NAMED
AFTER ATHLETE CHUCK TAYLOR.
>> ♪ MY ADIDAS
>> Reporter: FAST FORWARD TO THE
1980s-- SNEAKER COMPANIES SAW AN
EMERGING MARKET IN BLACK AND
URBAN COMMUNITIES.
>> SNEAKER CULTURE, HIP-HOP
CULTURE, STREET WEAR, THEY'RE
ALL PART OF THIS COMMUNITY THAT
STEMS FROM, YOU KNOW, HIP-HOP IN
THE '80s.
THERE WAS A DISTINCT MODE OF
DRESS THAT, YOU KNOW, FOR A LOT
OF MINORITIES, LIKE, THESE WERE
OUR STATUS SYMBOLS.
>> IS IT THE SHOES?
>> Reporter: NOTHING BROUGHT
MORE STATUS THAN OWNING A PAIR
OF "J"s, OR AIR JORDANS, CREATED
BY NIKE IN THE BASKETBALL ICON'S
ROOKIE SEASON.
DE LEON BELIEVES THIS IS WHEN
SNEAKERHEAD CULTURE WAS BORN.
>> IT'S LIKE ADVERTISING WAS
MADE TO MAKE US WANT THESE AS
LUXURIOUS ITEMS THAT
REPRESENTED, "OKAY, I HAVE
ENOUGH TO SPEND $200 ON A SHOE."
YOU KNOW, "MY HOUSE MAY NOT BE
AS BIG AS I WANT IT TO BE, BUT I
GOT THEM Js, THOUGH."
>> Reporter: SNEAKER SALES IN
THE U.S. TODAY ARE $34 BILLION A
YEAR.
DOZENS OF BLOGS AND FORUMS
ANNOUNCE SNEAKER RELEASE DATES
AND WHERE TO SNAG A COVETED
PAIR.
DE LEON POINTS TO HIGH END
SNEAKERS ON DISPLAY AT THE
MUSEUM BY DESIGNERS SUCH AS
CHRISTIAN LOUBOUTIN, JIMMY CHOO,
AND EVEN CHANEL.
THIS 2009 COLLABORATION SNEAKER
BETWEEN LOUIS VUITTON AND KANYE
WEST RETAILED FOR $960.
THIS EBAY SELLER IS ASKING FOR
$3,400 FOR HER PAIR.
>> IT'S A GREAT FEELING, BUT
IT'S NEVER OVER.
>> Reporter: TYE WALLEN SAYS HE
CARES LESS ABOUT BRAND-NAME
RECOGNITION OR PRICE TAGS.
SNEAKERS SIMPLY MAKE HIM HAPPY.
HE KNOWS MANY PEOPLE MAY NOT
UNDERSTAND HIS PRICEY HOBBY, BUT
HE'LL KEEP COLLECTING SNEAKERS
FOR YEARS TO COME, KEEPING A
RUNNING WISH LIST ON HIS
SMARTPHONE.
>> ANY SHOE THAT I BOUGHT, I
DON'T REGRET.
YOU CAN BE ANYBODY YOU WANNA BE
THROUGH A PAIR OF SNEAKERS.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE THAN JUST
FASHION, SNEAKERS IN AMERICA ARE
BIG BUSINESS.
VIEW OUR INFOGRAPHIC ONLINE AT
PBS.ORGNEWSHOUR.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AERIAL DRONES
CAN BE USED FOR SPYING ON
ENEMIES AND NOW, IN MEXICO, FOR
SAVING TURTLES.
OFF THE WARM WATERS OF OAXACA,
MEXICO, HAS A NEW PLAN TO
PROTECT THE THREATENED "OLIVE
RIDLEY" TURTLE, DEPLOYING A PAIR
OF DRONES THIS WEEK TO KEEP
WATCH ON THEIR EGGS.
THE SMALL GREEN SEA TURTLES
RETURN TO THIS STRETCH OF
COASTLINE EVERY YEAR TO HATCH
THEIR EGGS IN THE SAND BY THE
THOUSANDS.
THEY ARE HUNTED BY BIRDS, DOGS,
AND CRABS... OR EATEN BY LOCAL
RESIDENTS.
MEXICAN ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS
SAY THEIR NEW EYES IN THE SKY
CAN SPOT PEOPLE ENCROACHING ON
THE EGG SANCTUARIES.
>> (TRANSLATED): FROM THE AIR,
IT'S EASY TO IDENTIFY THE PATHS.
WHEN SOMEONE WALKS, THEY LEAVE A
TRACK AND, WHEN MANY PEOPLE
START TO WALK ALONG THAT TRACK,
WE START TO SEE PATHS.
SO THIS EQUIPMENT HELPS US
IDENTIFY WHO HAS THAT KIND OF
ACCESS.
>> AS FEDERAL INSPECTORS, WE
SECURE THE EGGS IN A
PRECAUTIONARY MANNER.
UP TO NOW, WE'VE SECURED UP TO
9,000 TURTLE EGGS, WHICH WE
RETURN TO THE BEACH.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN THOUGH IT'S
ILLEGAL TO SELL TURTLE MEAT AND
EGGS IN MEXICO, THAT DOESN'T
DETER POACHERS FROM STEALING
EGGS-- EVEN IN BROAD DAYLIGHT--
AND SELLING THEM FOR ABOUT A
DOLLAR APIECE.
ON THIS OAXACA BEACH EARLIER
THIS YEAR, 80 PERCENT OF THE
UNGUARDED EGGS DISAPPEARED.
OFFICIALS HOPE THIS NEW EFFORT
USING DRONES WILL KEEP MORE
TURTLE EGGS SAFE UNTIL THEY
HATCH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY
BASKETBALL HALL OF FAMER
MOSES MALONE HAS DIED AM HE
WAS A THREE TIME NBA MOST
VALUABLE PLAYER AND LED THE
76ERS TO THE CHAMPIONSHIP IN
1983.
FOLLOWING A 21 YEAR CAREER,
MALONE REMAINS IN THE
LEAGUE'S ALL-TIME TOP TEN
FOR POINTS SCORED AND
REBOUNDS.
MALONE WAS ALSO ONE OF THE
FIRST PLAYERS TO GO STRAIGHT
FROM HIGH SCHOOL DIRECTLY TO
THE PROS.
HE WAS 60 YEARS OLD.
AN APRIL GOSS IS THE SECOND
WOMAN EVER TO SCORE IN
COLLEGE FOOTBALL AFTER
KICKING AN EXTRA POINT FOR
AN EASY WIN OVER DELAWARE
STATE.
IT WAS HER FIRST CHANCE AFTER
FOUR YEARS ON THE TEAM.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW,
CORRESPONDENT MILES O'BRIEN
EXPLORES THE LATEST RESEARCH
IN THE RACE TO CREATE AN
EBOLA VACCINE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.